Large Hadron Collider - Wikipedia

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_Hadron_Collider

electrons are stripped of the hydrogen ions leaving only the nucleus
containing one proton. Protons are then accelerated to 2 GeV and
injected into the Proton Synchrotron (PS), where they are accelerated
to 26 GeV. Finally, the Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS) is used to
increase   their   energy   further   to   450   GeV   before   they   are   at   last
injected (over a period of several minutes) into the main ring. Here,
the proton bunches are accumulated, accelerated (over a period of
20   minutes)   to   their   peak   energy,   and   ﬁnally   circulated   for   5   to
24 hours while collisions occur at the four intersection points.[41]

The LHC protons originate from
the small red hydrogen tank.

The   LHC   physics   programme   is   mainly   based   on   proton–proton
collisions. However, shorter running periods, typically one month per
year,   heavy-ion   collisions   are   included   in   the   programme.   While
lighter ions are considered as well, the baseline scheme deals with lead ions[42] (see A Large Ion Collider
Experiment). The lead ions are ﬁrst accelerated by the linear accelerator LINAC 3, and the Low Energy Ion
Ring (LEIR) is used as an ion storage and cooler unit. The ions are then further accelerated by the PS and
SPS before being injected into LHC ring, where they reach an energy of 2.3 TeV per nucleon (or 522 TeV per
ion),[43] higher than the energies reached by the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. The aim of the heavy-ion
programme is to investigate quark–gluon plasma, which existed in the early universe.[44]

Detectors

Seven detectors have been constructed at the LHC, located underground in large caverns excavated at the
LHC's intersection points. Two of them, the ATLAS experiment and the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS),
are large general-purpose particle detectors.[2] ALICE and LHCb have more speciﬁc roles and the last three,
TOTEM, MoEDAL and LHCf, are very much smaller and are for very specialized research. The ATLAS and
CMS experiments discovered the Higgs boson, which is strong evidence that the Standard Model has the
correct mechanism of giving mass to elementary particles.[45]

The BBC's summary of the main detectors is:[46]

Detector

Description

ATLAS

CMS

ALICE

LHCb

One of two general-purpose detectors. ATLAS studies the
Higgs boson and looks for signs of new physics, including
the origins of mass and extra dimensions.

The other general-purpose detector, like ATLAS, studies
the Higgs boson and look for clues of new physics.

ALICE is studying a "ﬂuid" form of matter called quark–
gluon plasma that existed shortly after the Big Bang.

LHCb investigates what happened to the "missing"
antimatter from when equal amounts of matter and
antimatter were created in the Big Bang.

CMS detector for LHC

Computing and analysis facilities

Data produced by LHC, as well as LHC-related simulation, were estimated at approximately 15 petabytes per
year (max throughput while running is not stated)[47]—a major challenge in its own right at the time.

The LHC Computing Grid[48] was constructed as part of the LHC design, to handle the massive amounts of
data   expected   for   its   collisions.   It   is   an   international   collaborative   project   that   consists   of   a   grid-based

5 of 29

3/3/21, 19:57

